# <ins>Introduction</ins>
  My name is Ryan Summers. In May 2022 I started working towards a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science at Southern New Hampshire University. It is now April 2025, and I have created this ePortfolio as a final project for my Computer Science Capstone course. It is a collection of some of the different projects I worked on while in school. These projects have been enhanced since I innitially created them. The enchancements where made to meet five specific course outcomes. These outcomes are: 
  
  1. Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science
  2. Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts
  3. Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices
  4. Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals
  5. Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources

  Accompanying each of the three projects are brief descriptions of the project, original code I developed in courses, enhanced code I wrote in CS-499, and a narrative explaining how I met the course outcomes.

## <ins>Professional Self-Assessment</ins>
Going through the program has not only helped me build a solid technical skill set, but I've also picked up some great communication skills. For instance, in my CS-319 UI/UX Design and Development class, I designed an app that scanned barcodes on grocery items and informed users about the healthiness of the ingredients. I collaborated with several people to understand their expectations for the app. I sketched out the app and a few pages, then re-interviewed everyone for their feedback. Using that input, I created a digital version of the screens and met with everyone again before finalizing the design. This course taught me how to communicate effectively to gather the information needed for a quality design.

In multiple courses at SNHU, I was provided with real world scenarios. These scenarios involved communicating with stakeholders. I learned quickly that communication with stakeholders is a key component in software design. I had to be able to understand what they wanted me to produce. Working with these scenarios allowed me to learn how the software development life cycle works. It also taught me to look at things from different perspectives. 

Understanding data structures and algorithms is essential in programming. I have been able to use and create multiple solutions to problems with algorithms and sort methods. Knowing what sort method to use to solve a problem as efficiently as possible is important. If the wrong one is used, you could make something that should run relatively quickly, take a long time. 

I've also spent a lot of time working with databases. Creating a structured database and being able to properly maintain it are important skills to have. Just about everything online needs a database. Think about online shopping. A database is used to store inventory. Having the knowledge to interact with different databases is a skill I can leverage in a ton of different scenarios. 

Security is one of the most important things to consider while working on any project. I do not want to code something that just works. I will provide a technically sound piece of software that will be up to date with the latest security patches. No company wants to have software that leaves them vulnerable due to something small being overlooked. 

     
## <ins>Code Review</ins>
  Code reviews are an important part of software development. Often code is written hastily. It can function but may not be up to industry standards. They allow developers time to scrutinize all aspects of the code base. Code reviews help ensure quality products are produced. Linked below is my code review of the three projects I have listed on this site. 
- [Code review video](https://youtu.be/k8gAWyZzXic)

## <ins>Enhanced Projects</ins>
### Project One
  For Enhancement One: Software Design and Engineering, I chose to enhance a program that calculates interest. It was originally written in C++ in June of 2023. It is from CS-210: Programing Languages. CS-210 teaches students how to write C++ code. To meet the software engineering and design enhancement requirements for this project, I converted the C++ code into Python and cleaned up the output format to look more visually appealing. 

  Including this artifact in my ePortfolio is a good way to show my technical abilities. It shows I can work with C++ and Python. This program is not a memory hog and would be beneficial for the backend of a webapp. It is not meant to be a standalone application. For this reason, I felt Python would be a better, more usable language, for the program to be written in. While working on the conversion, in line comments were used so anyone looking at the code later can quickly understand what is going on. Doing so helps this enchantment meet one of the course outcomes, which is to design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts.  I created a technically sound Python program. It shows my use of two different industry tools. PyCharm and Visual Studio were used in the conversion. Visual Studio allowed me to test the original C++ code. PyCharm allowed me to efficiently code and debug the new Python code. The use of these tools and my programing knowledge help meet another of the course goals, demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals.

- [Original Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Software%20Engineering%20and%20Design/Original)
- [Enhanced Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Software%20Engineering%20and%20Design/Enhancement)

### Project Two
  For Enhancement Two: Algorithms and Data Structures, I chose to work with a project from CS: 250 Software Development Lifecyle. It is a slideshow the displays the top 5 vacation destinations. It has a picture of the location and a short description. The application has a previous and next button that allows the user to change slides. To meet the milestone requirements for algorithms and data structures I added a randomize button and cleaned up the code. 

  The random button demonstrates 2 of the course outcomes. The first outcome it meets is to design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices. This program serves the user by displaying desirable vacation locations and does so in a nice-looking manor. This was done while implementing a new random button. The button functions with a method I created that generates a random number then iterates through a loop to determine the next slide shown to the user. This was done while considering the overall look and feel of the application. It had to fit in with what was already designed. The second outcome the enhancement meets is to develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. When I created the method, I did more than just create a sorting solution. It contains code that prevents the minimum number from being greater than the maximum number. If this was not present, the application would crash. It also has code that limits the amount of loops that can run. If there were many slides, the program could take too long to run or even freeze.

- [Original Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Algorithms%20and%20Data%20Structures/Original)
- [Enhanced Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Algorithms%20and%20Data%20Structures/Enchancement)
  
### Project Three
  For Enhancement Three: Databases, I used a project from CS: 340 Advanced Programming Concepts. The original work on this project was done in June 2024. The project was intended to teach students how to write queries to MongoDB. The original quires were designed to create, read, update, and delete single entries. The program was enhanced by adding new functions such as creating multiple entries at once, updating multiple entries at once, deleting multiple entries at once, and counting the total entries in the database. After adding these 4 new functions, I added in line comments per industry standards. 

  I chose this project so I could demonstrate 2 course outcomes. The first outcome met is employing strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision-making in the field of computer science, I did this by adding in line comments that described each method. Adding these allows others to view the code and quickly understand what it does. This is a Python program. Even if someone is not familiar with Python will be able to look at the code and decide if functions should be added or removed. The program itself also allows users to sort through a large database with ease. I am also able to show another course outcome with this project. By using the same style and organization of the original program, I am demonstrating an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals. I have produced clear, clean, and modular enhanced code. I did not have to rework the entire code base. This adds value by not spending as much time on the project. Less time spent means it costs less to produce, adding value.

- [Original Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Databases/Original)
- [Enhanced Code](https://github.com/SummersSNHU/SummersSNHU.github.io/tree/main/CS-499%20Databases/Enhancement)
